Hello friends
In this video we will learn how to do the
time and space complexity analysis of loops.
Here we have an example algorithm with a single for loop.
The first statement here is int i and sum equal
to zero which is a simple statement and hence it
will take only one unit of time.
Next we have for ( i equal to one i less than or
equal to n and i plus plus )
And how many iterations will this loop have? Let us suppose
n equal to a three, then the for loop condition
will be true for i equal to one, i equal to two
and i equal to three and for i equal to four
when the condition is checked it will fail. So total
n plus one (n+1) times this will be executed, n times
the condition will be true and the next time it
will fail and the statement inside the for loop will
execute only n times. In the n plus one (n+1)th iteration
the for loop condition fails and control will come out.
So this inner statement sum equal to sum + i
will be executed only n times and finally we have
the return sum statement which will take one unit of
time. So total time taken by this programme t of x
t(x) = 1 + ( n+1 ) + n + 1
that is t of x
t(x) = 2n + 3.
That is, if n equal to one
the total time will be two into one plus three
which is five units and if n equal to five.
Then the total time taken will be to two into five
plus three which is 13 units.
So time taken depends on the input value the smaller
the input the lesser the time taken.
But how do we say that time complexity here?
See here we have a polynomial expression and
if we have a polynomial expression like this
in general, we will take the largest exponents
that is the degree of the polynomial as the
time complexity. And here the largest exponent is
n power 1.
So the complexity is order of n O(n). Now what about
the space complexity? Here we have n taking one unit
of memory, then we have i and sum also requiring
one unit each and we don't have any other memory
requirements in this programme.
So the total memory required s of x s(x) equal to one
plus one plus one equal to 3 which is a constant.
So the space complexity is order of one O(1).
Now let us take another example algorithm which takes a
one dimensional array as input.
First let us find the time complexity.
The first statement will take one unit time and next
we have the for loop.
And how many iterations will it have ? Let's suppose
n equal to three,
then the for loop condition will be true for i equal
to zero, one and two and for i equal to three
when the condition is checked it will fail.
So total n plus one times this will be executed.
n times the for loop condition will be true and
the next time it will fail, and the statement inside
the for loop will execute only n times.
That is when the for loop condition is true
the statement inside will be executed. In the n plus one th
iteration of the for loop the condition will fail
and control will come out.
So this inner statement sum equal to sum plus arr
of i will be executed only n times and finally
we have the return statement which will also take one
unit of time.
So the total time taken t(x) equals to one
plus n plus one plus n plus one that is
t(x) = 2n + 3.
And as we just learnt we have to take the
degree of this polynomial expression and we will get
the time complexity as order of n O(n).
So that was the time complexity.
Now let us discuss about the space complexity.
Firstly we have function parameters arr[] and n.
An arr[] is an array of size n, so it will take
n units of memory. And there is a variable n
and it will also take one unit of memory.
So total n plus one.
Next we have the variables i and sum which will
require one unit of memory each and that's all. So
that total memory taken here s of x equal to
s(x) = n + 1 + 1 + 1 that is
s(x) = n + 3 again
it is a polynomial.
So what do we do? we find the degree and
it is one.
So the space complexity is order of n O(n). Now
in the same code
let us take one more for loop and analyse its
space and time complexities.
So for this new loop for i equal to zero i less than
n and i plus plus it will also have n
plus one executions. 'n times' the condition will be true
and one time it will fail.
So this will be executed n plus one times.
Now what about the inner statement? it will be
executed only when the for loop condition is true
that is n times.
So the total time taken here will be n units
So the total time taken is 1 +
(n+1) + n + (n+1) + n + 1
that is 4n + 4.
But again if you say the degree of polynomial is
still one, so the time complexity is order of n
again now what about the space complexity? For
this loop
it will not take any more memory units because there
are no new variables or anything.
So the space complexity will also remain the same.
So what can we conclude from this example? Say we
can observe that having a separate loop doesn't make any
major impact on the time complexity.
So if an algorithm has n separate loops then the
loop which takes largest time will be the time complexity
of the algorithm.
Now see another example
Here we have a two dimensional array and a nested
for loop. So let us find the time complexity first.
The first statement will take just one unit of
time and next we have the for loop and how
many iterations will it have? We have for i equal to
zero i less than n i plus plus. So it will
have total n iterations.
That is if n equal to 3 then the condition will
be true for i equal to zero
i equal to one and i equal to two, and for
i equal to three
the condition will fail.
So including the failed case check total n + 1
times this will be executed.
And what about these inner statements? We have a
loop inside first and it will be executed whenever the
outer loop condition is true.
That is n times.
So n times this will be executed for i equal to
zero i equal to one i equal to two up to i equal
to n. And each time
how many iterations will it have? it will have iterations
for j equal to 0
j equal to 1, j equal to 2
up to n that is n times the condition will
be true and one time that is for the n
plus oneth time it will fail. So total n plus
one times this will be executed and it will be
executed for n times by the outer loop. So total
n into n plus one.
Now what about this inner most statement? It will
be executed whenever the inner loop condition is true
that is n times and n times
the outer loop will execute the inner loop and n
times
the inner loop will be true so n into n
times this statement will be executed
So n * n will be the time taken by
this statement
And the final return statement will take one unit time
So total time taken will be t of x equal
to 1 + ( n+1) + n * ( n+1 )
+ n * n + 1 that is
1 + n + 1 plus, n * n
n square, plus n * 1  n, plus n * n
n square plus 1 that is 2 n square +
2n + 3
So it's a polynomial expression.
And what do we do now? We find the degree
and here we have n raised to two and then
n raised to one.
So 2 is the degree so the time complexity will
be order of n square.
So if n equal to 2, total time is 4 and
if n equal to 5 total time is 25 units
now that was the time complexity.
Now what about the space complexity? Here we have a
two dimensional array, so it will have n rows and
n columns. So it requires n * n memory units
that is n square memory units.
Then we have n which will take one unit
and then we have i, j and sum each requiring one
unit of memory.
So that total memory required s of x equal to
n square + 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 that
is n square + 4. Again it's a polynomial and
we have the degree 2, so the space complexity
will be equal to order of n square.
Now see another example,
here we have a two dimensional array and nested triple
for loop.
So let us find the time complexity of this algorithm first.
The first statement will take just one unit of
time
Next we have the for loop and how many
iterations
will it have? We have the outermost loop for ( i equal
to zero, i less than n, i plus plus ).
So it will have total n iterations,
that is if n equal to 3, the condition will be
true for i equal to 0, 1 and 2,
and when i equal to 3 the condition will fail.
So total n plus one times this will be executed.
And what about these inner statements? All these statements inside
will be executed whenever the outer loop condition is true,
that is n times.
So n times all these will be executed.
That is for i equal to 0, 1, 2 up to n. And inside
first
we have a for loop.
And how many iterations will it have? It will have
iterations for ( j equal to 0,
j equal to 1, j equal to 2
up to j equal to n-1.
when j equal to n it will fail.
That is n times the condition will be true and
one time that is for the n plus one time
it will fail. So total n plus one times this
will be executed and it will be executed for n
times by the outer loop.
So total n into n plus one.
And what about the statements inside the second for loop?
it will be executed
when the second for loop condition is true
that is n times, and inside we have a for
loop
and how many iterations will it have? It will have
n iterations
That is for k equal to 0, k equal to 1,
up to k equal to n-1 and for
k equal to n,
the condition will fail.
That is n times the condition will be true
and for the n plus one time the condition will
fail.
So total n plus one times this will be executed
and it will be executed for n times by the
second for loop and n times by the outermost for
loop. So total n * n *
(n+1) times.
Now what about this inner most statement? It will
be executed whenever the innermost loop condition is true.
That is n times. So n times the outermost loop
will execute the inner loop and n times
the inner loop will be true and it executes the
innermost loop and n times
it will be true,
just as we discussed. So n * n * n
times
this statement will be executed.
Now the final returns statement will take one unit time,
so total time taken will be t of x equal to
1 + (n+1) + n *
(n+1) + n * n * (n+1)
+ n * n * n + 1 that is
1 + n + 1 + n * n = n square plus
n * 1 = n plus n * n *
n = n cube plus n * n * one =
n square plus n * n * n = n cube
plus one that is 2 n cube + 2n
square + 2n + 3.
And again it's a polynomial expression
So what do we do? we find the degree and
here we have n cube, n square, and n raised to
one.
So 3 is the degree here, so we can say
the time complexity of this algorithm is order of
n cube .
So that was the time complexity.
Now what about the space complexity? Here we have
a 2D array,
so it will have n rows and n columns. So it
requires an n * n memory units that is n square
memory units.
Then we have n which will require one unit of
memory,
and then we have i, j, k and sum each
requiring one unit of memory.
So total memory required is n square + 5. Again
it is a polynomial,
so if we find the degree and we got degree
equal to 2 here. So space complexity of this algorithm
is order of n square.
So that is how we can find the time and
space complexities of algorithms with loops.
And we understood that the time complexity of a loop
is actually equal to the number of times the innermost
statement is to be executed.
That is in the last example we saw that the
innermost statement executed n * n * n times and
hence we got the time complexity order of n cube.
And even if you have separate loops in your algorithm
it really doesn't make a major impact on the time
complexity.
And if you have n separate loops, the loop which
takes the largest time will be the time complexity of
the whole algorithm.
For example if your algorithm has a simple for loop
and a nested triple for loop then the time complexity
of that algorithm will be order of n cube.